.TH TTYCHATTER 1 "2026-05-20" "ttychatter 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ttychatter \- native C/ncurses Gemini terminal client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ttychatter
.RI [ SESSION ]
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --resume
.I NAME
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --list
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --models
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --update-models
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --test-model
.I MODEL
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --doctor
.br
.B ttychatter
.B --version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ttychatter
is a full-screen terminal client for Google's Gemini API. It uses ncurses for
the interface, libcurl for HTTPS, and json-c for JSON parsing and generation.
.PP
The client keeps plain text session logs, saves rolling context snapshots,
maintains a local cache of model metadata, supports user-selected model tests,
accepts file attachments, extracts generated fenced code blocks into files, and
can open an external editor for composing longer prompts.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --resume NAME
Open an existing named session, or create it if no log exists yet.
.TP
.B --list
List saved sessions and exit.
.TP
.B --models
Print cached Gemini generateContent models. If no cache exists, ttychatter tries
to fetch one from Google.
.TP
.B --update-models
Fetch the Gemini model list from Google, save the local cache, print visible
models, and exit.
.TP
.BI --test-model " MODEL"
Send the configured model-test prompt to MODEL and print the response.
.TP
.B --doctor
Print diagnostics for API-key presence, terminal size, writable directories,
editor resolution, model cache, and Gemini DNS resolution.
.TP
.B --version
Print version information and exit.
.SH INTERACTIVE KEYS
.TP
.B F1
Open help.
.TP
.B F2
Open the model selector. Enter saves the selected model. The selector can also
test the selected model and update the model cache.
.TP
.B F3
Paste and save a Gemini API key.
.TP
.B F4
Open the session browser.
.TP
.B F5
Open options.
.TP
.B F6
Show rolling context memory.
.TP
.B F7
Attach a file for the next request.
.TP
.B F8
Open the configured external editor for the input buffer.
.TP
.B F9
Show credits.
.TP
.B F10
Quit.
.TP
.B Ctrl+G
Send the current message.
.TP
.B Ctrl+Q
Quit.
.TP
.B PageUp, PageDown
Scroll the transcript.
.TP
.B Enter
Insert a newline into the input buffer.
.TP
.B Ctrl+U
Clear the input buffer.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is a simple KEY=VALUE file. The default path is:
.PP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/ttychatter/gemini/config
.PP
If XDG_CONFIG_HOME is unset, the path is:
.PP
.I ~/.config/ttychatter/gemini/config
.PP
Recognized keys include:
.TP
.B GEMINI_API_KEY
Gemini API key. The environment variable GEMINI_API_KEY overrides the saved
value.
.TP
.B MODEL
Selected Gemini model id. A leading "models/" prefix is accepted and stripped.
.TP
.B CONTEXT_TURNS
Number of previous user/assistant turns to keep in request context. The legacy
key HISTORY_LIMIT is also accepted as an alias when CONTEXT_TURNS is not set.
.TP
.B SESSION_DIR
Directory for session logs.
.TP
.B ATTACHMENT_DIR
Directory for saved generated code and response files.
.TP
.B EDITOR
Editor command used by F8. If unset, VISUAL, EDITOR, then vi are tried.
.TP
.B MODEL_CACHE_FILE
Path to the cached model metadata JSON.
.TP
.B MODEL_FILTER_GENERATE_CONTENT
When true, show only models that list generateContent support.
.TP
.B MODEL_FILTER_REQUIRE_TOKENS
When true, show only models with nonzero input and output token limits.
.TP
.B MODEL_FILTER_HIDE_PREVIEW
When true, hide models whose metadata looks preview, experimental, exp, or beta.
.TP
.B MODEL_MIN_INPUT_TOKENS
Minimum input token limit for visible models.
.TP
.B MODEL_MIN_OUTPUT_TOKENS
Minimum output token limit for visible models.
.TP
.B MODEL_SORT_ORDER
Sort order for model output. Supported values are api, model, name, display,
input-desc, and output-desc.
.TP
.B MAX_ATTACHMENT_BYTES
Maximum attachment size for inline request parts. The default is 20971520.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/ttychatter/gemini/config
Default config file.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/ttychatter/gemini/sessions
Default session log directory.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/ttychatter/gemini/attachments
Default generated/attachment file directory.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/ttychatter/gemini/models.json
Default model cache.
.SH SECURITY
The client never prints the API key in doctor output. When it writes the config
file, it attempts to set mode 0600. Users who do not want to save secrets can set
GEMINI_API_KEY in the environment instead.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Network, configuration, model, or runtime command failure.
.TP
.B 2
Command-line parse error or fatal allocation failure.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1),
.BR ncurses (3)
